# The Unscientific Asthmatic

I've had Asthma for some 30 years now.  I'm writing this as of age 38.  It all started suddenly one day when I was around 8 or 9, I didn't feel well and it was an entirely new feeling for me, all my mother and father could do was to tell me to lie down in bed, which was actually making it harder to breathe, but we didn't know what it was at the time.  I knew that I was having trouble breathing, it was like my lungs couldn't process enough oxygen, each breath felt like my lung capacity was being reduced to a tenth of the original capacity.  The difficulty is in two parts, one in inhaling air, the other is in exhaling.  I am writing this such that I might be able to help those in the future to understand this terrible disease and to provide hopefully some understanding into the triggers and some of my methods for coping with Asthma.

## Meet One of Asthma's Best Friends', Hello Eczema!
Let's start from an even younger age, even before Asthma I had Eczema, this is a terrible skin affliction that causes rashes triggered by certain allergens, some are triggered through the foods you eat, some are environmental, and even others are from the compounds in your daily products.  I can't remember exactly when I first had Eczema, but let's just assume that this happened when I could first remember.  So you can take a whole spate of allergy tests, basically a set of small skin pricks laid out on your forearm like a grid, the first time I tried this they had probably 30 or so allergens in liquid form for what I'm guessing were the common allergens at the time (~1985): (chicken) egg, oranges, shrimp, pet dander, rag weed, pollen, dust mites, etc.  once pricked with these needles, the allergens needed some time for a reaction (say 10 minutes), some allergens cause more immediate effects than others, but this part has always been quite crude, a nurse basically comes in to physically inspect the size of the bumps for where the allergens were injected.  I remember some bumps to be pretty massive, like a massive mosquito bite maybe protruding some 2mm from the surface of the skin, but others were barely detectable, maybe just a small bump, and if you have no allergic reaction then just a hole where they punctured your skin.  I have taken allergy tests probably 7-8 times in my life with varying results.  I can't remember the specifics from my first visit other than that I was prescribed to have allergies to oranges at that time, the best way to avoid allergic reactions--avoid the allergen.  That's the thing with atopical allergies, there seems to be no immediate cure, but there are several methods:

1.  Avoiding the allergen
1.  Atopical cream - this seems to have more immediate effects to contain the situation, but this works only temporarily
1.  Allergy shots - 2 years typically, every week, x number of shots, I believe this method is based on increased exposure to the allergen such that your immune system learns to deal with the allergen.
1.  Time - sometimes allergies disappear over time, I guess time really does heal all.
1.  Inhibitor pills like benadryl [sic]
  
So basically there was a point in my life where I avoided eating oranges until the next set of allergy tests cleared me from this allergen probably a few years later, these things seems to change/morph over time.  From what I vaguely remember from my *research* on the web, allergies are actually an over-reaction of the immune system, the immune system falsely identifies something as a threat and reacts to it in the way that it knows how, in my case rashes.  Time and time again, I've heard from various doctors that Eczema and Asthma typically go hand in hand, more so that if you have Eczema, there's a great chance that you'll also have Asthma, but not the other way around, if you have Asthma, you might not have Eczema, so don't worry, but I just want to provide full disclosure.  The rashes seem to evolve where there's a build up of sweat where limbs fold like behind the knee, in front of the elbow, all around the neck, my shoulder area, etc (surprisingly not the armpit area).  I remember even getting these rashes where the bottom lobe of my ear met my face.

## Pedigree

Somewhat tangential, but my mother passed away at an early age (~60) from Breast Cancer, and it was only until then that I realized how important it is to understand your family's medical history, quite unfortunately.  But my mother and father, and their mothers and fathers each did not have Asthma or Eczema.  In fact, none of my father's 4 siblings or mother's 6 siblings had either, how strange!  But my father once told me that he vaguely remembered that a distant Aunt of his (blood related) had Asthma.  In my father's later years (>60), I observed that he also started to develop some rashes on his skin, seemingly because of dryness, but I'm certain that there's some allergen that's triggering his reactions.  Other than that, my sister, my daughter who's 5 now, so far, don't seem to have Eczema or Asthma.

## _Sucks to your Asthmar_

When I was first diagnosed with Asthma, I remembered specifically that the doctor mentioned that I had exercise induced Asthma, meaning that whenever I went out for daily activities at school, like soccer or jogging, I'd start having Asthma attacks.  These attacks would nearly floor me, my first reaction was to put my hands on my knees because I just couldn't get enough oxygen, it was like running a marathon at full sprint from just having run 10 meters.  My parents didn't really pro-actively try to engage with the school to limit my exercise, which in a sense was good, but I really got winded everyday at school during physical education.  Now here's where the unscientific observations start to come out, but I also noticed that during changes in weather, either from cold to warm, cool to cold, or hot to cool, seemed to cause specific bouts of Asthma, specifically during Spring and Fall, this maybe a mere coincidence perhaps due to pollen or ragweed, but certainly worth noting.  My allergy doctor also found out some time later that I was allergic to dust mites, basically these microscopic bugs in dust, this was sort of the end all allergen, oranges I could avoid eating with great disdain, but how in the world could I avoid dust?!  The prescription was to change bed sheets often and vacuum everywhere, all the time, curtains, carpet, bed sheets, pillows, etc, I can't remember if he recommended wearing a mask when outside, but this was the one allergen that nobody wanted.  I was also found to be allergic to pet dander, and I can tell you without having to be pricked with pet dander allergen that once I get into a house or apartment where a furry pet lives, everything goes wrong, the Asthma kicks in automatically, sneezing, coughing, watery eyes, etc, and it's quite immediate.  But that's not all, I also start wheezing if someone who's around furry animals often and has pet dander on their clothing or hair, that seems to get me, too.  My father got rid of his cat almost 2 years ago and he had steam cleaned all the carpets, drapes, etc, but still, I'd have terrible bouts of asthma.  So these are the things that the allergy tests found that I was allergic to:

Allergen | Observation
--- | ---
Oranges | After a year I was eating oranges without rashes.
Dust Mites | Seems to cause Asthma as well, not so much rashes.
Pollen | Not really a big deal for me, no rashes, perhaps triggers some Asthma, my father and sister have it worse than me.
Pet Dander | Definitely, cats, dogs, rabbits, gerbils, etc.
Rag Weed | Seems to bloom in August-September

All in all, I don't find allergy tests to be that conclusive, you can't test for everything in the environment or foods that you eat, at least no doctor I've visited has done so, but here are my observations:

Allergen | Observation
--- | ---
Strong smells | Second hand cigarette smoke seems to sometimes cause Asthma attacks, same with scented candles, incense, perfume, smoke from a fire, gasoline, etc.
Chicken egg/Chicken | Instant rashes, could last for a couple days at least.  Odd thing is that duck eggs seem to not trigger an allergic reaction.  Haven't observed any differences between egg white and yellow and this one's hard to avoid because cake, ice cream, caesar salad dressing, mayonaise, fried foods (bread crumbs seem to leverage egg to keep it stuck to the food) all contain egg, and I eat these, just because I like the taste.  Some pasta also includes egg and fried rice from the chinese fast food joint usually includes egg.
Seafood | Gross simplification, but shelled seafood like crabs, lobster, shrimp and some cephalopods like squids, octopus, I'm pretty sure clams, mussels, scallops, etc.  I found that not only salt-water breeds of these, but also fresh-water (there are fresh water varieties of crab in china).  This ranks with chicken egg, major rashes.  Fish seems ok, fresh water or salt water based, haven't tested all of these out.
Lamb meat | Skin rashes
Peanuts | Anything in the nut family, this doesn't cause rashes per se, and I don't get to any life threatening points where my entire throat is swollen, but this seems more subtle and triggers more phlegm build up in my lungs which seems to trigger more asthma attacks.  Sunflower seeds which aren't in the nut family, but seem to also trigger Phlegm/Asthma.
Chocolate | Love chocolate, but seems similar to peanuts, this triggers more phlegm which triggers more asthma attacks.  Snickers bars are the absolute worst, I used to love going on a slight binge of Snickers bars, this would often times coincide with my worst bouts of Asthma.
Cold Beverages and Dessert | More on this below.  But alcoholic based, non-alcoholic based: juices, sodas, ice water, etc.  Popsicles, ice cream, etc.
Cold Beer | Damn, I still drink it though, seems to give me mild Eczema.
Dishwasher detergent | Seems to get my Eczema embroiled, I try to avoid hand washing dishes without gloves, my fingers would develop these major rashes after being dried/cracked.
Laundry detergent | Eczema rashes, sometimes Asthma from the smells, I tend to buy non-scented detergent as a result.
Certain soaps | Ivory, Irish Spring, those that seem to have high/low PH balances, I have tried some of those balanced-PH based soaps with good effect (Avene).
Certain lotions | I generally have dry skin, so it makes my skin more itchy in general, but I seem to have issues with certain lotions, not all identified, I try to avoid most of these.  I noticed that lots of lotions contain some amount of rubbing alcohol, it's only a small portion, but this tends to have a drying effect even though it's ironically a part of *moisturizing* lotion.

# Medication

I have used inhalers for Asthma since they were in trial form, I believe.  Inhalers are really bad in general as if I recall correctly they seem to thin out the bones/bone marrow if used often, I'm sure that there are other bad side effects, but i've been so dependent on these for the past 30 years that it's just not even worth looking at what it's damaged.  The most immediate fix for Asthma is to take a few puffs, there were times in my life where I'd have to use an inhaler 3-10 times a day.  There were also occasions where I had too much phelgm in my lungs that the inhaler didn't have any effect at which point it was a hospital visit with a ventilator and possibly iv fluid, but that's happened only once or twice in my life.  Typically I was prescribed Prednisone to reduce the phelgm build up in my lungs, but I understand this to be a steroid type, not good for the body, not good for eyesight, I believe, probably bad for the kidney or liver, again, I try to avoid looking at the side effects, but the past 20 years I haven't taken Prednisone.  There were inhalers that were more preventative, I seem to remember one where it looked like a white periscope, you basically pull out this tube from the inhaler that then gets locked into an L shape.  This was supposed to be used 1-3 times a day to prevent Asthma attacks, didn't seem to work that well.  There's one preventative inhaler now that looks like a plastic, purple diaphragm that seems to be most effective for me, it contains something like 60 puffs total, which means it's used up in a month.

# Other Asthma Triggers

This is a strange one, but having grown up in the United States, and living abroad in Asia for the past several years, I've found a few perhaps useful pieces of information towards understanding the triggers for some forms of Asthma, this is where things get really unscientific.  In Asia, typically people drink warm beverages, tea, hot water, in the US, we drink a lot of ice cold beverages, this is throughout the year, sure coffee's become popular, but mostly people want cold beverages, and most likely will add ice cubes.  In many parts of Asia, there's a negative perception about drinking cold beverages, seems to harm the body, the best I can explain this is that the difference of temperature between a cold beverage (especially ice water) and body temperature seems to stimulate the body negatively, perhaps certain organs, I won't speculate on which particular organs, but even if ice water's going down the digestive track, these organs are nestled close enough together such that the temperature could rub off on the other organs, perhaps negatively.  After cracking down personally on cold beverages, it seemed to reduce some level of my Asthma attacks, or at least coughing.  Of course in the dead of summer, it's hard to drink warm/hot drinks and there's really no better way to cool off the body than with a cup of ice water, believe me I used to drink multiple gallons of ice water during and after a tennis match in the broad of summer.

I've also found that cold wind blowing on my chest seems to trigger Asthma attacks on occasion, coughing as well, make sure you have adequate clothing in the fall/winter, and perhaps a wind breaker for those windy days during other seasons, cover the chest area, front, back, sides.  I was always told to breath through my nose because it probably looks retarded to breathe through your mouth, nose hairs help to filter out some particles, but most importantly, in my opinion, is the very fact that it warms the air coming into the throat and lungs, I'm not sure who used to tell me that, perhaps it was some friends on the cross country team, perhaps I was too gullible, but the advice went along the lines of when running, you should exhale through your nose, and inhale through your mouth, the reason is counter to what I'm describing here regarding Asthma, but when you're running, you're heating up, so the cool air helps to moderate the body temperature, and when you use your nose to breathe out, the filtering causes the air to move out of your lungs more slowly (when compared to the mouth which is a bigger opening than the nostrils).  

Some other asian anecdotes (not sure what you call them), there's this concept of inner balance in the body (perhaps qi?  this is a bit of a loose interpretation), when you eat tons of fried and oily foods, you sometimes develop cold sores in your mouth, well that's one of the symptoms of eating fire induced foods (huo qi), there are foods that counter balance that such as watermellon.  Surprisingly not all fruits counter balance the fire inducing effect, like if you eat massive amounts of oranges, but everything in moderation seems ok.  Leafy greens seem, even if cooked in oil, to have an overall counter balance effect, I'd imagine raw vegetables like salad are great.  Another odd thing in chinese culture is that often times when one just comes out of surgery or is sick, typically you'd be given duck soup because the chinese believe that it has the counter balance effect; chicken soup, believe it or not, is not that popular (looking at you Campbell's).  Seafood, chicken, lamb meat, fried/deep-fried foods, all seem to have lots of fire inducing effect which also coincidentally causes me to get Eczema breakouts all over my skin, call it a dumb coincidence, but I've been avoiding those things lately with pretty good effects.

# Things that have Helped

1.  Avoiding allergens, food, environment, etc, this is the most annoying advice because it signals the fact that there's no cure.  And I've heard the contrary, that you should try to build tolerance to an allergen by moderately giving yourself a little over time with linearly increasing dosage--the misery that I have to deal with is really not worth it, not something that I've done.
1.  Exercise - I actually ran cross country in high school (5K per race), we'd do a lot of things to try to expand lung capacity like hold our breath under water for long periods of time, obviously running daily.  Even though I had exercised induced Asthma, this helped more than it hurt, but do this in moderation, don't over-do it.
1.  Dressing appropriately, always bring that wind breaker along.

# Summary

Asthma and its ugly sister Eczema are two really terrible diseases, at the moment there's no cure, and you're stuck with it typically for a long time.  I can say that they have both had a negative physical as well as psychological effect on my life, but I've had to live with it and cope with it for some 30 years.  With these mere observations, I hope that I can shed more light on these terrible diseases and my strange ways of coping with them.  Since there's no medical basis for much of what I've written, take these with a grain of salt, and *use at your own risk*, my intent is to help others.  
